Apollo 14
Crew Selection:
Corrected Transcript and Commentary Copyright © 2003 by W. David Woods and Ronald Hansen. All rights reserved.
Last updated Tue Jun 17 16:21:23 2003

   The crew of Apollo 14, Shepard, Roosa, and Mitchell, didn't meet the usual selection criteria for an Apollo lunar mission. This made their choice not only unusual and but also somewhat controversial.

   The crews selected for the first four Apollo Moon flights, 8, 10, 11, and 12, were very experienced. At least two members of each crew had flown previously on at least one Gemini mission. The least experienced of these crews, that of Apollo 11, still had a total of 3 flights and seven days of spaceflight time among them. These missions gave them valuable experience in working and living in space. With the exception of Apollo 14, the commanders of all the later Moon flights, Apollo 13 to 17, had not only at least one Gemini flight, but had also flown on a long duration Apollo mission, usually flying to the Moon and back.

   Of the Apollo 14 astronauts, only Shepard had flown before. Almost ten years before his Moon flight, he made a 15 minute sub-orbital Mercury flight. This was in sharp contrast to his backup commander on Apollo 14, Gene Cernan, who not only had made two Gemini flights, but also came within 40,000 feet of the Moon flying as the lunar module pilot on Apollo 10. Shepard had even less space flight experience than the backup lunar module pilot, Joe Engle, who had made several flights in the X-15.

   Although Shepard was America's first man in space, before he got a chance to fly again, he was grounded by an, at the time, incurable inner ear disorder. After almost ten frustrating years working for his close friend and fellow Mercury astronaut, Deke Slayton in NASA's astronaut office, he underwent a new surgical procedure that not only fixed his problem, but restored him to flight status. He immediately went to Slayton who was in charge of assigning flight crews and got himself assigned not just as a crew member of the next available Apollo mission, but as the commander. He then exercised his right as commander to pick two astronauts, neither with previous space flight experience, to fly with him.

   Among other problems, this selection didn't conform to the standard practice of having a crew first serve as the backup crew of a previous mission before starting to train for their own mission. Although the training for an Apollo mission was long and arduous, it was just barely adequate. Especially the commander would have to learn not only to master two complex space craft, the command/service module (CSM) and the lunar module (LM), to learn a whole series of complicated procedures and contingency procedures, but also to become a competent lunar geologist. By serving first as a backup crew, they received almost as much quality training time as the prime crew since they had to be able to fill in for an indisposed prime crew member. Building on this base, once they started training for their own mission, they could concentrate on the mission specific aspects of their own flight. However, of the Apollo 14 crew, only Mitchell had served on a backup crew.

   Nevertheless, Shepard was widely admired and respected inside NASA and most people were quite happy to see him get a chance to fly again. However, letting him lead a rookie crew to the Moon after minimal training was too controversial. It appeared to many that the selection was based more on his close friendship with Slayton than on merit. A case could also easily be made that Slayton was pursuing a hidden agenda. Although he had been one of the original Mercury astronauts, a mild heart problem, detected after his selection, had kept him from actually flying in space. Slayton freely admitted in "Moon Shot", the book he coauthored with Shepard, that he hoped sending Shepard to the Moon as soon as possible would improve his own chances of making a spaceflight.

   Although Slayton's authority to make crew selections was rarely questioned, pressure from upper management forced him to make a small change. Few doubted Shepard's ability. Roosa and Mitchell were also regarded as among the best of the rookie astronauts. The main worry was that the lack of training time would limit their ability to meet all the mission objectives. Slayton had originally given Shepard, Roosa, and Mitchell the Apollo 13 mission. He agreed to move them back to Apollo 14 to give them an additional six months of training time. Jim Lovell, who had been originally in line for Apollo 13, would now get to fly this mission after all.

   This wise and wide reaching decision turned out well for almost everyone. NASA was fortunate to have the very experienced and unflappable Jim Lovell commanding Apollo 13 when its oxygen tank blew up on the way to the Moon. The down time needed to fix the weakness made apparent by this near disaster gave Shepard and his team even more time to prepare for their mission. Shepard devoted his enormous talent and drive, the qualities that had made him the natural choice as America's first astronaut, to making sure that no one would ever have to apologize for sending him to the Moon. He achieved this goal. And although Jim Lovell, who had been in line to fly Apollo 13 anyway, never got to land on the Moon, the flight of Apollo 13 made him one of the best known of the Apollo astronauts, second only to Neil Armstrong. And even Neil didn't get a first class Hollywood film made about his flight complete with one of Hollywood's best actors, Tom Hanks, to play his role. Last but not least, Slayton eventually even managed to overcome his heart problem and got to fly on the Apollo-Soyuz mission 